---
layout: post
title: Who is this guy?
tags: [Introspection]
comments: true
---
# My Traits
  * Logician/mathematician/programmer: I use of mathematics and logic as fundamental tools for reasoning. I will try to provide causal arguments or constructive proofs while debating, and I will question arguments given to me that do not appear causal or sound.
  * Platonic debater: I default to the Socratic method, but I still know that I know nothing.
  * Wary realist: I have the look of a man who accepts what he sees, but understands that not everything he sees may be true (because our senses can be hacked and our perception blurred).
  * Zealot of Hypnos: Sleeping is a sacred activity. I will fanatically try to defend my sleeping habits, because they are the hardest to enforce. While sleeping, we recover our body from fatigue, and we open the door to a world of pure creation for our minds. It's beautiful.
  * Pacifist atheist: I try not to entertain discussions that involve the nature or existence of God(s), and I respect pacifist theists and their beliefs.
  * \_\_trovert: I once took an internet quiz and it told me that I was both an "extrovert introvert" and an "introvert extrovert." Beyond the oxymorons, one thing is for sure: I am terribly shy when meeting new people on my own.
  * Reformed Existentialist: I overcame existential angst with the following definition of authenticity:

     > I am authentic (i.e. I believe I am a virtuous human being) iff I am constantly in a state of improvement. There is no need for a direction or a justification for said improvements, as long as I believe them to be virtuous; this implies that improvement must be clearly quantified and assessed satisfactory using predefined and (hopefully) objective grading scheme.

  * Academic: I am aware that not all the problems I am trying to solve are practical. Being practical is an extrinsic property. Plus, we never know if a solution we provide is going to *eventually* be practical.

# My Tenets
  *
  * Refousian work ethics: 6 day work weeks.
    > "It is my duty as an individual to understand and improve myself and my environment."

  * (F)Actual Causality:

  * Stoicist Enforcement:

# Some thoughts

  * Do you know how hard it is to fully describe a context in 140 characters? I get 24 pages for my papers and I always end up falling short.

  * You didn't come here to make the choice: You know how to solve the problem, but you still need to compute the solution. Thinking is not learning to solve the problem, thinking is computing the solution. Computing some solutions has some side effects: they may alter the way you solve other problems, which is why we have to think about the meaning of thinking, so that we can compute the solution to the problem of "how to think better". You are not choosing, you are rediscovering.

  * Do we still choose to compute a solution or not? I think we have no choice but to first compute the solution to this problem. It is just wonderful the level of complexity and the amount of layers you could have.

  * I can't deny that thinking that you have choice about the different problems is comfortable. It gives you control. The thing is, you already the control. You are already swimming in the river. Trying to understand should not feel like you are swimming against the current. Maybe the point of conflict is between body and mind. I have a reality that comes from my body and a reality that formed in my mind. And I think that there is where you can make a choice. 

# A Metaphor of Dreams
Imagine a line of open doors, each leading to a different room in space. Without any control, we just fall from door to door, experiencing several realities as we pass through. The lucid dreamer eventually learns how to stop falling, and learns to go through the doors at will; they even learn to create doors. This has its risks though. Would you want to go back to a reality where you have less control than you do in your dreams? I would not blame you if you say no.
  > No. They come to be woken up. The dream has become their reality. Who are you to say otherwise?

This is also why you should be wary of video games. Entertaining alternate realities might act as a coping mechanism for when you don't want to deal with this reality.
  > You know,


Ideally, I would like to have Sunday free, so in reality I have to account for
!! I put `add_external_project` in the CMake file
I really recommend you follow this tutorial, parts [I](https://medium.com/@mshockwave/writing-llvm-pass-in-2018-part-i-531c700e85eb) and [II](https://medium.com/@mshockwave/writing-llvm-pass-in-2018-part-ii-640f680978ec).

[//]: # ( A more interesting example can be found in `<llvm-project>/llvm/examples/Bye`. It also generates a dylib.)
