---
layout: post
title: Remembering Universal Coalgebra
subtitle:
tags: [Coalgebra,Programming]
comments: true
---
**Note**: although I post the official links to the texts I discuss in this webpage to support the authors, most of the material (or their draft versions) can be found for free in the webpages of the different authors.

# What is Universal Coalgebra?
Jan Rutten's [Universal Coalgebra: a Theory of Systems](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304397500000566) will be 20 years old (officially) in October this year. I remember I first read it in 2014, and it completely changed the way I understood the theory of automata I learned in during my bachelors. I fell in love with the work, so much that I am writing this blog post about it 6 years later.

>To put in perspective how popular Universal Coalgebra was, it belonged to the top 10  most cited articles (out of 11000) of the TCS journal in the year 2015.

In my personal experience, Universal Coalgebra showed me how systems that I first considered vastly unrelated where actually tightly connected, if not equivalent at a not-so-high level of abstraction. It was changing the way I knew and understood the world of automata, data structures, and discrete time. Today, a nostalgic feeling took hold of me, and I felt like reliving those moments of fleeting happiness, while also, hopefully, lowering the knowledge barriers for others so that this text also sparks curiosity and joy in others.

# A Bit of Motivation
I think that having a concrete problem in mind helps motivate learning a new theoretical framework like Universal Coalgebra. Since I have been working with LLVM lately, I thought we could think about the following problem: given two programs \\(P_1\\) and \\(P_2\\), how do you prove that \\(P_1\\) is equal to \\(P_2\\)? Mostly, I am going to be referring to *semantic* equality, because a compiler whose guarantees are *syntactic* equality is not very interesting, right?

> If you are not familiar with the difference between syntax and semantics, this is the gist of it: syntax is the textual expression you write in the programming language of your choice with some intention in mind, i.e., you want this text to be compiled into a program that does "something"; you can think of this "something" as the semantics of the program (for now).

Let us say that \\(P_2\\) is \\(P_1\\) after we've compiled it. If we are compiling to improve the efficiency of \\(P_1\\), then \\(P_2\\) should do the same things that \\(P_1\\) does, only faster, right? Working with these definitions feels like walking over thin ice. What do we mean by "the same things"? Can it do more? Do we *want* \\(P_2\\) to do more/less? Not to stir a storm in a glass of water, but...
> "A problem thoroughly understood is always fairly simple" -- C. Kettering

At POPL 2020, I had the privilege to attend the presentation of the distinguished paper [Guarded Kleene Algebra with Tests](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3371129). Why is this paper relevant? Because it helps us understand the problem of program equivalence at both syntactic and semantic levels. Why am I bringing this paper up in a blog post about Universal Coalgebra? Because it is a beautiful piece of work that uses both algebraic and coalgebraic methods to address these questions.
> It also addresses the following relevant questions: A) Is it enough to prove syntactic equivalence to ensure semantic equivalence? and B) Is there a way to directly prove semantic equivalence?

# Preliminaries
I remember continuously hitting knowledge barriers while reading Universal Coalgebra. I remember thinking to myself: "I know those words are English, but what to they mean in this context?" It felt like trying to decipher the secrets of knowledge. Any progress would feel like an incredible victory!

We are going to build a tower, and first we need to settle the foundations. The foundations of Universal Coalgebra are *categories*.

## A Little Primer in Category Theory
A *category* is a collection of *objects* and *arrows* between them, satisfying a set of rules. These rules are rather simple:
  * Every object \\( X \\) has a unique *identity arrow* \\(X \xrightarrow{id_X} X \\);
  * If we have two arrows \\( X\xrightarrow{f}Y \\) and \\( Y\xrightarrow{g}Z \\), then there is an arrow \\( X\xrightarrow{g \circ f}Z \\) that defines the *sequential composition* of \\( f \\) and \\( g \\); i.e.,
  \\[ X\xrightarrow{g\circ f}Z \triangleq X\xrightarrow{f}Y\xrightarrow{g}Z ;\\]
  * Identity arrows act as identities for composition, i.e.,
  \\[ X\xrightarrow{id_X}X\xrightarrow{f}Y =X\xrightarrow{f}Y = X\xrightarrow{f}Y \xrightarrow{id_Y}Y;\\]
  * Finally, the composition of arrows is associative, i.e.,
  \\[ X\xrightarrow{f}Y\xrightarrow{g}Z \xrightarrow{h}W=X\xrightarrow{g \circ f}Z \xrightarrow{h}W = X\xrightarrow{f}Y \xrightarrow{h \circ g}W=X\xrightarrow{h \circ g \circ f}W. \\]

I think that the category of sets and functions **Set** is the most intuitive place to start. For a set \\( X \\) and an element \\(x \in X \\):
  * We define the identity function \\( id_X\\) by \\( id_X(x)\triangleq x \\);
  * Given \\( X\xrightarrow{f}Y \\) and \\( Y\xrightarrow{g}Z \\), we define \\( X\xrightarrow{g \circ f}Z \\) by \\( g\circ f(x)\triangleq g(f(x)) \\).

  > Henceforth, it is important to think in terms of equality modulo isomorphism, and not in terms of strict set equality.

**Note:** In the following, I wanted to use curly braces for set definitions, but there is so much you can do without tinkering with the LaTeX plugin that I'm using. I had to use square braces instead. Sorry!

Let us now consider some interesting *constructions* for sets \\(X\\) and \\(Y\\):
  * The *exponential* set \\(Y^X\\) is the set of functions from \\(X\\) to \\(Y\\), also denoted \\(X\rightarrow Y\\);
  * The *product* set \\(X\times Y\\) is the set of pairs \\((x,y)\\) where \\(x\in X\\) and \\(y\in Y\\);
  * The *sum* set \\(X + Y\\) is the set of tagged elements defined as follows
  \\[ [\texttt{Left }x | x\in X]\cup [\texttt{Right }y | y\in Y] \\]
  where \\(\cup\\) is set union.
  > Data constructors in Haskell generalise this sum construction, and they are extremely useful for pattern-matching!

That these constructions are called sum, product and exponential is no coincidence! All the equivalences you learned in calculus apply here; e.g. \\(Z^{(Y^X)}\equiv Z^{(X\times Y)}\\), and \\(X\times(Y+Z)\equiv (X\times Y)+(X\times Z)\\). There is an equivalence in particular that I find quite cute: let \\(0\\) denote the empty set, and let \\(1\\) denote a set with a single (wildcard) element, say \\(* \\). The equivalence I refer to is \\(0^0 \equiv 1 \\). The proof comes from the fact that we are in a category, so \\(0^0\\) must contain, at least, the identity arrow \\(id_0\\).
>A more mind-boggling equivalence is \\(X^0 \equiv 1 \\) for any set \\(X\\). Proving it involves showing that any two functions from \\(0\\) to \\(X\\) cannot be different.




It may seem arbitrary that I introduce categories as a starting point, but we can build on top of their definitions.

### How to be your own semantics

### To download:
```shell
git clone https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git
cd <llvm-project-directory>  
mkdir <build-directory>
cd <build-directory>
#cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD=X86 -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS=clang -DLLVM_HELLONEWPM_LINK_INTO_TOOLS=ON ../llvm
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug \
      #-DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang
      #-DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++
      #-DLLVM_USE_NEWPM=ON\
      -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD=X86\
      #-DLLVM_<TOOL_NAME>_LINK_INTO_TOOLS=ON \ #Maybe this is what put things inside of Opt, develop tool in `tools/`
      #-DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=<installation-directory>
      ../llvm
cmake --build . -- -j7

cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DLLVM_USE_NEWPM=ON -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS=clang -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD=host ../llvm
cmake --build . -- -j7

Binaries should be in `<build-directory>/bin`

```
### To Check:
```shell
make check-cxx
make check-clang
```

### To install:
```shell
cmake --build . --target install   
```
Finally, define the `$LLVM_DIR` variable
```shell
export LLVM_DIR=<installation-directory>
```
This should install a version of LLVM in your `<installation-directory>`.

## To test
To run `clang` with the newly built libraries, you need to add additional parameters when compiling
```shell
$LLVM_DIR/bin/clang -I/Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Platforms/MacOSX.platform/Developer/SDKs/<MacOSX-Version>.sdk/usr/include <hello-world>.c

```
## Generate low-level and bytecode files
**TODO**

## Hello World pass

I refused to make a legacy pass, which has a couple of complications:
  * We have to include them in the pipeline.
  * We need to use the legacy PassManager pipeline.
  * To register a pass with the new PM, you need to add it to the `PassRegistry.def` file.


LLVM comes already with a `Hello World` pass in `<llvm-project>/llvm/lib/Transforms/Hello/`. When built, this pass creates a dylib in
`<build-folder>/lib/LLVMHello.dylib`. This pass is registered with the _legacy_ pass manager. Unfortunately, I did not find any way to register passes with the new pass manager, so we have to follow [llvm-tutor](https://github.com/banach-space/llvm-tutor) in creating passes that register both with the legacy and with the new pass manager.

We are going to be adding passes to the Transform directory. That way, they are included in `opt` thanks to the legacy pass manager. To add it, use the following
```make
add_llvm_pass_plugin(HelloNewPMPass
  HelloNewPM.cpp  
  DEPENDS
  intrinsics_gen
)
```
ignore
```make
add_llvm_library( libHelloNewPM MODULE BUILDTREE_ONLY
 HelloNewPM.cpp

  DEPENDS
  intrinsics_gen
  PLUGIN_TOOL
  opt
  )
```

To invoke this pass, we use `opt` in `$LLVM_DIR/bin/`
```shell
 $LLVM_DIR/bin/opt -load lib/LLVMHello.dylib -hello -disable-output <ll-file>.ll
```
**With the new pass manager, the pass should already be inside of `opt`**
To invoke our pass with the **new** pass manager, we have to provide the sequence of passes
```shell
#$LLVM_DIR/bin/opt -load-pass-plugin=<> -passes="<pass-name[,pass-name]>" <ll-file>.ll #Does not seem to find passes in Mac
```

## A second Hello World Pass
We want to register our own plugin, called `Cookies`. To do so, we copy the `Hello World` plugin, modify the appropriate `CMake` files, and run from `<build-directory>`
```shell
cmake --build lib/Transforms/Cookies
```
!! I put `add_external_project` in the CMake file
I really recommend you follow this tutorial, parts [I](https://medium.com/@mshockwave/writing-llvm-pass-in-2018-part-i-531c700e85eb) and [II](https://medium.com/@mshockwave/writing-llvm-pass-in-2018-part-ii-640f680978ec).

[//]: # ( A more interesting example can be found in `<llvm-project>/llvm/examples/Bye`. It also generates a dylib.)
### A Duplicating BB plugin


### To keep in mind


The print method must be implemented by “analyses” in order to print a human readable version of the analysis results. This is useful for debugging an analysis itself, as well as for other people to figure out how an analysis works. Use the opt -analyze argument to invoke this method.

By using the –debug-pass=Structure option, for example, we can see how our Hello World pass interacts with other passes. Lets try it out with the gvn and licm passes:

We can link passes now! YAY! put them all in the same library
```shell
./bin/opt -load lib/LLVM-Tutor.dylib -legacy-duplicate-bb < input_for_duplicate_bb.ll  > output_for_duplicate_bb.bc

./bin/llvm-dis output_for_duplicate_bb.bc -o output_for_duplicate_bb.ll
```
Combined
```shell
./bin/opt -load lib/LLVM-CTP.dylib --legacy-ctp-merge-branches /Users/EGRM/Desktop/CTPExamples/ToBalance_unsafe.ll | ./bin/llvm-dis -o Pass_ToBalance_unsafe.ll
```
### Converting DARPA to C to test CTP
### Spectre examples also work to test for spectre.

### Examples (for EGRM)
In llvm <build> folder.
```shell
./bin/clang -S -o0 -emit-llvm -I /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Platforms/MacOSX.platform/Developer/SDKs/MacOSX10.15.sdk/usr/include -o /Users/EGRM/Desktop/CTPExamples/ConstantTimeComparison_unsafe.ll /Users/EGRM/Desktop/CTPExamples/ConstantTimeComparison_unsafe.c
```

###Putting everything back together
```shell
./bin/clang -S -emit-llvm -I /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Platforms/MacOSX.platform/Developer/SDKs/MacOSX10.15.sdk/usr/include -O0 -o /Users/EGRM/Desktop/CTPExamples/Print_unsafe.ll /Users/EGRM/Desktop/CTPExamples/Print_unsafe.c

./bin/opt -load lib/LLVM-CTP.dylib --legacy-ctp-merge-branches /Users/EGRM/Desktop/CTPExamples/Print_unsafe.ll | ./bin/llvm-dis -o Pass_Print_unsafe.ll

llc -filetype=obj -O0 -o Pass_Print_unsafe.o Pass_Print_unsafe.ll
clang -o Pass_Print_unsafe Pass_Print_unsafe.o            
./Pass_Print_unsafe
```


./bin/opt -load lib/LLVM-CTP.dylib -mergereturn -mem2reg -legacy-ctp-merge-branches /Users/EGRM/Desktop/CTPExamples/ToBalance_unsafe_cheat.ll | ./bin/llvm-dis -o Pass_ToBalance_unsafe_cheat.ll

Interesting instruction:
```
CastInst *AllocaInsertionPoint = new BitCastInst(
    Constant::getNullValue(Type::getInt32Ty(F.getContext())),
    Type::getInt32Ty(F.getContext()), "reg2mem alloca point", &*I);
```
the LLVM loop unroll is not the transformation we want. In pseudocode, LLVM unroll is
e^[0..n] -> (e;...;e)^[0..n/k] where k is the number of es in e;...;e, while the
unfold we want is e^[0..n] -> (e +[0..n] 1);...;(e +[0..n] 1)
