---
layout: post
title: How I Tried Changing my habits
subtitle: Adapting what worked for me to my adult life
tags: [Life hacks, personal experience]
comments: true
---
# Reasoning Behind the Credits System:
## My Relevant Tenets and Traits
  * Refousian: I have endured weeks with 6 working days and, and I can do it again.
  * Academic: I have spent my whole life in academic environments. I work better when the objectives are clearly defined beforehand. I would be OK with a system that grades my progress using with a 1-5 scheme, 1 being *unacceptable*, 2 being *inadequate*, 3 being *barely acceptable*, 4 being *expected* and 5 being *exceeds expectations*.

## Total Budgets
  * Each day has 24 hours.
  * Sleep is sacred. If I don't sleep, I get cranky, I get headaches, and I can't focus. I have to sleep at least 7.5 hours per day, and I don't want to sleep more, because I have found that 7.5 hours is optimal for me.
  * I have, effectively 16.5 hours remaining per day. With a 6 day work-week, that would mean a 99 hours budget.

# Credit System
## Uniandes
  * 1 credit corresponds to 3 work hour/week.
  * Maximum 20 credits per week, so maximum 60 hours work/week.
  * Each masters course was normally 4 credits, with 3 hours of lecture and 9 hours of independent work.
  * Quota is filled with 5 courses.

## SUTD
  * 1 credit corresponds to 1 work hour/week
  * Maximum 48 credits per week, so maximum 48 hours work/week.
  * Each PhD course is normally 12 credits, with 3 lecture hours/week and 9 independent work hours/week.
  * Quota is filled with 4 courses.

In this aspect, the credit conversion ratio is 1:3 (Uniandes:SUTD), but Uniandes allowed for 1 more course. Since I am just starting, I am going to enforce quality over quantity, so I will opt for less courses to ensure better content and to allow space for social activities. If the method works, I'll allow for one more credits.

## Current State
  * I am going to use the SUTD currency system for credits, i.e., 1 credit corresponds to 1 hour.
  * In theory, my research course takes already 48 credits. This leaves no time for a research seminar, and I am not in the mental condition to actually work 48 hours a week on research alone. I am going to go for 24 credits on PhD Research and a 12 credits Research Seminar.
  * The research seminar covers stuff that I find academically interesting, like coalgebras, or incorrectness logic. I don't think it makes sense to have a 6 credit seminar, because reading a paper and explaining it requires time!
  * The other 18 credits to enforce personal growth, i.e., to explore subjects in philosophy, mindfulness, and exercise. These could be "elective" half-courses, taking 6 credits each.
  * This totals 54 credits. I might consider adding 6 more credits to the PhD Research course (making it worth 2.5 courses) if I think that I can handle it.

## The Week
  * We have stated that we have 99 hours/week in total, 16.5 hours total/day.
  * I have to fit 48 work hours/week. With a 6 day work-week, this conveniently splits into 8 hours of work/day. This leaves 8.5 free hours/day.
  * If I reserve 1.5 hours per meal, this leaves 4 free hours in the day.
  * I am going to be using pomodoros. Each pomodoro is 25 minutes + 5 minute break. Long sessions are 4 pomodoros long, and they should be followed by a non-work session.
  * Out of those 8 hours, 4 must be research, and 4 are free to be distributed among the other courses.
  * In the remaining 8.5 non-work hours/day we are going to fit eating, coffee breaks, pomodoro long breaks, and a nap.
  * We are going to split time in the following categories:
    * Work
    * Free
    * Meal

  The courses I decided to register for my first month are:
    * PhD Research (2 course units for 24 credits)
    * Research Seminar (1 course unit for 12 credits)
    * Personal Growth (1 course unit for 12 credits, distributed into 6 exercise credits and 6 philosophy credits)

That is all the budget I have for this month. This limit helps me focus and keeps me motivated.

# Observations
  * I advice against increasing the workload of a 54 work hour week if you want to preserve a work/life balance (we have a 54:45 work/free hours ratio already). The ratio of strictly work related hours (i.e., the ones they pay me for) is 36:63 (technically, it should be 48:51, but I provide arguments against it in the following). The 36:63 ratio already has similar metrics to the German workload of 40 work hour weeks, so fight me if you think I'm lazy.
  * Ideally, the 18 credits from personal growth will start to migrate from *work* to *free* as they become habits (i.e., they should *feel* less like work and more like activities you simply do because you like them). Nevertheless, I would still advice against increasing the workload, since you need to fit 12 more credits per week to preserve the 54:45 work:free ratio. If you really want to work those 12 extra credits, I recommend the space from 8:30pm to 10:30pm, and include a 30min break after. Really think about it carefully though... When are you going to go out with your friends? or watch a movie?
  * If you feel like it, Saturday is 8 hours and there is still time from 8:30pm until 12:00am. Good luck having a social life.

# Splitting the Year as if there are no Conference Deadlines
For SUTD Graduate students, the first  academic period is 14 weeks long including a "recess" week (#7) and an examinations week (#14). The second period starts 2 weeks after, so weeks #15 and #16 are left to discretion of the advisor and your conscience (have you been a good PhD student or a bad PhD student?). The second period (#17-#30) is also 14 weeks long, with a similar structure (#23 is recess and #30 is examinations). Then, Graduate students are officially given 3 weeks holidays (#31, #32 and #33). Then, the third period (#34-#47) starts, and it is also 14 weeks long (#40 is recess and #47 is examination). Then, similar to the first period, there are two interim weeks (#48 and #49), and the remaining weeks (#50, #51 and #52) are used for an Independent Activity period (IAP).

Each academic period is 14 weeks of pure research work for Grad Students. If you are a good student, you could justify earning those extra 4 weeks for holidays (#15, #16, #48 and #49). This totals 7 weeks holidays a year, which is not shabby at all. Plus, you have an IAP of 3 weeks where you can try stuff and not be afraid that it is going to fail, you, however, have to work on something.

# The Syllabuses

## PhD Research
  * Workload: 24 hours per week
  * Objective: conduct high-quality research and hone project managing skills
  * Grading: we evaluate different competences
    * Planning Accuracy.
    * Adaptability while doing research.
    * Ability to document results

### Achievements and Goals
There are different tiers of achievement. Ambitious achievements like publishing in a Tier 1 conference are a bad idea to set as goals, but rather as directions. Goals, on the other hand, are milestones towards said achievements.

Evaluation will take place as follows: at the beginning of a week, we set a milestone to reach. Since we do not know yet whether the milestone is achievable, we have to document the progress towards it. 


## Research Seminar
  * Workload: 12 hours per week.
  * Objective: read a paper per week and write a summary of it
  *



## Personal Growth
  * 18 hours per week, distributed 6 hours Physical, 6 hours Philosophy and 6 hours Mindfulness
  * 1 hour each day for exercise
  * 6 hours
  * Civ 6 Philosophy Challenge: Document a Civ 6 game where I only adopt policies and governments that align with my political and philosophical views. Germany and Science victory (because I'm german and I am a researcher).



## One day




I am going to assume that my budged is 20 credits.
  * I'm being paid for 48 hours of research work, so it is like I'm taking a 12 credits course. That leaves me with 8 more credits to invest.
  * In Germany we had 40.5 hour-weeks (i.e., time you had to be at the office doing research). So, I was in theory working less than I was before.


Ideally, I would like to have Sunday free, so in reality I have to account for
!! I put `add_external_project` in the CMake file
I really recommend you follow this tutorial, parts [I](https://medium.com/@mshockwave/writing-llvm-pass-in-2018-part-i-531c700e85eb) and [II](https://medium.com/@mshockwave/writing-llvm-pass-in-2018-part-ii-640f680978ec).

[//]: # ( A more interesting example can be found in `<llvm-project>/llvm/examples/Bye`. It also generates a dylib.)
